CSE 4471 ­ Dr. J. S. Jones
homework 3 - laws and ethics
50 pts. ­ due date and time: Tue., 9/19, 11:59pm

Spring 2016

Please read reading chapter 3, pages 109 - 151 of Whitman and Mattord, review the laws and ethics slide deck and then answer the following questions. (reminder: all homworks must be submitted to Carmen in .pdf format) For each of the following (1 - 15) match the term/definition/description (A - Z) which best fits (one answer per question):
1. Formally enforced rules that mandate or prohibit certain societal behavior. 2. Formal and informal definitions of socially acceptable behavior. 3. An exception to copyright law which allows use of protected material under certain limited circumstances. 4. The legal standard for conduct required to inform oneself of applicable laws and abide by them. 5. A body of formalized expectations, often created and enforced by employers. 6. Characteristics of enforceable policies. 7. When an employee acts according to company policies which are illegal, they have performed what? 8. When considering multiple nationalities and ethnic groups, ethics are what? 9. An excellent tool for setting proper expectations for ethical behavior is what? 10. The primary organizations which promote ethics in Information Technology are what? 11. Effective information security policies are designed to be what? 12. Standards are built on top of policies, and provide what? 13. What are practices, procedures and guidelines? 14. What is the "sphere of use" intended to illustrate. 15. What is the "sphere of protection" intended to illustrate.

A. laws B. ethics C. the wide variety of controls available to
protect information at all interfaces within it's sphere of use D. that people interact with information through a wide variety of mechanisms E. fair use F. due dilligence G. detailed steps used to promote increased adherance to established standards H. a simple re-statement of policy from another pont of view J. policies K. consistent, constant and unchanging L. constantly evolving

M. a dedicated service to their employer N. an illegal act O. the same in the hearts of all humans P. education and training S. cost/benefit analysis T. more detailed specific actions that must be done to
comply with policy U. significantly variable, leading to potential
misunderstanding W. consistent, fair, widely applicable and regularly
updated X. distributed, readily available, easily understood and
formally achnowledged Y. federal and state governments Z. professional societies

The Ohio State University

CSE 4471 ­ Dr. J. S. Jones 16. - 20.) Label the Sphere of Use.

Spring 2016

21. - 25.) Label the following Network Topology Diagram.

The Ohio State University

